#summary Hotrepart is a demonstrator project to illustrate a process for online repartitioning of a relational database.
#labels postgresql, ec2 java, autoscaling, cloudcomputing, partitioning, sharding
#sidebar TableOfContents

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

I've tried to be consistent in my use of terminology throughout the codebase and the documentation, however alternate phrases might slip through, and the terms are defined in many places throughout the docs. Therefore a glossary might be useful.

= Partition =

A part of a database. A database that's been split into multiple, smaller databases is generally desscribed as being partitioned.

Partitioning can be done in two ways. 'Vertical' partitioning stores different tables on different servers. 'Horizontal' partitioning, also known as 'sharding', distributes different rows of the same table across different servers.

= Range =

In the system used by the sample database schema in hotrepart, the field which is used to select which row is stored on what partition is a 128-bit number. From 00... to ff... this number is divided into 'ranges' that are allocated to individual partitions.

So, a partition stores data for a range of the keyspace. When repartitioning, the range for one partition is split into two different ranges, which each have their own partition at the end of the process.

= Server =

Generally a database server, or the computer on which the database software is hosted. Also called a host or an instance various places.

= Proxy =

A proxy is anything that accepts data in a particular protocol and forwards it onto an eventual recipient, while likewise relaying any response.

= dblink =

Dblink is an additional supplied module for PostgreSQL that allows different databases to execute procedures and queries on other databases.

